---
title: "Back to Basics : JavaScript : Part 1"
date: 2023-08-23
tags:
    main: self learning
    topic1: javascript
    topic2: basics
thumbnailImagePosition: left
thumbnailImage: https://ik.imagekit.io/hyegquogx/The_Learning_Project/Back%20to%20Basics%20-%20JavaScript%20Part%201.png?
author:
     display_name: Ritesh Gupta
---
At the beginning of the year, I decided to enhance my JavaScript skills. I have always considered focusing on a skill and increase my expertise by learning from the experts. In this context, I came across many JavaScript teaching courses, but only one worked well for me. It is the [Vanilla JS Academy](https://vanillajsacademy.com/) by Chris Ferdinandi. 

<!--more-->

I loved Chris' practical approach of taking big concepts and breaking it down into smaller video bytes coupled with practical examples. This series will cover topics related to basics of JS that I learnt as a part of the Vanilla JS Academy. And give my own spin on the concepts to help me solidify my understanding.

#### Getting an element in DOM

To get an element in DOM, you need to use the `document.querySelector` method. The `document.querySelector` method gets the first item that matches the condition. The method can be combined with multiple attributes to get the desired result:

```
//To get a class, we use the dot(.) notation and to get an ID we use the hash(#) notation

// Uses the class :
let btnClass = document.querySelctor('.services__item')
console.log(btnClass);

//Uses the ID
let btnID = document.querySelector('#services');
console.log(btnID);

// Uses the data-* attribute available
let btnDA = document.querySelector('[data-analytics = "item1"]');
console.log(btnDA);

```

{{< youtube L3NykWlR4ME >}}

#### Listening for event interactions

To listen for event interactions, we use the `element.addEventListener` method. The `addEventListener` method listens for the interaction type such as `click` , `hover` `keypress` and passes a callback function to run for when the event happens. There is a bunch of event listener methods available on the MDN [link](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Events).

For our use case, we will listen for `clicks` on the services section of our page, and when the event occurs we fire an `addEventListener` method. In the callback function, we will pass the `event` object which will give us access to properties - related to the event that was clicked and other values. One of the most useful properties is the `target` property which will get us more details of the element that triggered the event.

```
let btn = document.querySelector('#services');
btn.addEventListener('click', function(event){
   console.log(event);
   console.log(event.target);
   console.log(event.srcElement.outerText) // will return the text of the element that is clicked
});

```
{{< youtube GTUo4_0A2TI >}}

That is all for this blog post. Leave me a line on ritesh@thelearningproject.in to share some JavaScript basics that you might be interested in sharing.